
# Data Modeling with Postgres

## **Overview**
This projects required to analyze the data that a startup company has been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. Their analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. 

In this project, I applied data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, I defined fact and dimension tables for a star schema for the above analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL. 

## Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
## Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, I created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
    * songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
2. <b>users</b> - users in the app
    * user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. <b>songs</b> - songs in music database
    * song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. <b>artists</b> - artists in music database
    * artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. <b>time</b> - timestamps of records in <b>songplays</b> broken down into specific units
    * start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Project Files

```create_tables.py``` -> Drops and creates tables. Run this file to reset tables before each time running the ETL scripts.

```etl.ipynb``` -> Reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into tables.  

```etl.py``` -> Reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into tables. 

```test.ipynb``` -> notebook that displays the first few rows of each table to validate data loaded

```sql_queries.py``` -> Contains SQL queries for dropping and creating fact and dimension tables.

## How to run

Evironment should have Python with [psycopg](http://initd.org/psycopg/docs/) and [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/) installed. 

To run the main program: ```python main.py``` 

To create tables: ```python create_tables.py``` 

To run ETL: ```python etl.py``` 
