
# Data Lake

## **Overview**
A music streaming startup has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, I built an ETL pipeline that extracts data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. ETL pipeline is tested by running given queries and comparing obtained results with the expected results.

## Datasets
For this project, there are two datasets that reside in S3: 

Song data: ```s3://udacity-dend/song_data```

Log data: ```s3://udacity-dend/log_data```

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, I created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis, which includes following tables.

### Fact Table
1. <b>songplays</b> - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
    * songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
2. <b>users</b> - users in the app
    * user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. <b>songs</b> - songs in music database
    * song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
4. <b>artists</b> - artists in music database
    * artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
5. <b>time</b> - timestamps of records in <b>songplays</b> broken down into specific units
    * start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


## Project Files

```dl.cfg``` -> Contains AWS credentials.

```etl.py``` -> Reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3.

```SongPlayLocal.ipynb``` -> Jupyter notebook for running Spark in local mode and processing a subset of data files.

## How to run

To run main program: ```python etl.py```

To run in local mode: Run ```SongPlayLocal.ipynb``` notebook
